Title: Learning how to be a DeeJay
Date: 2019-06-02
Category: music
Tags: music, deejay,
Status: draft

The word DJ has become quite inextricably tied together with the EDM culture. So much so that most people judge DJs on their ability to create new content.

I have a completely different take on what DJing is all about. I consider it to be an art form that is about 2 things: song choice and transitions. This on the surface seems very precise and limited but let me tell you: it offers a delightful amount of possibility.

I'm going to call this DeeJaying.

It's about knowing which song to bring in where and knowing how to make the transition so subtle that people feel a mild surprise because they didn't realize the song had changed.

It's about walking the fine line between using the contents of your source material to express emotion and about using the transitions (the broader theme you're going towards) to achieve the same.

For me, it is the art form that has resonated with me the most. Writing doesn't even feel like art to me, even though there are a lot of similarities to this. Both of them involve certain discrete elements you combine to paint a broader picture. In the first case it's the song (a carefully chosen section) and in the second it's the word. With writing, I'm very much like a [RNN](ium.com/@curiousNupur/how-does-swiftkey-predict-your-next-keystrokes-b048ef67267d) that simply predicts the next best word. It doesn't force me to use my sense of creativity to grasp at what level of abstraction I want to be working on.

To be honest I didn't even really _understand_ what a mixtape really was until a few weeks ago. Only when I started doing this did it all _click_.

A mixtape is a very different affair from a playlist. A mixtape is a painting with songs. A playlist is just a basic crayon drawing of a rainbow. It has no form, no shape, no purpose, no grander design.

You may think you are extremely limited by the quality of your individual pieces. However, a good mixtape is more than the sum of its parts. And in a great mixtape you wouldn't even notice the individual songs just like you don't notice the individual colours in a painting.

At its core though, DeeJaying is a performance art and to perform, you need to know your audience. You need to be able to read the subtle cues that people have that give you feedback on whether they're liking what you're playing. Showmanship is another skill that any performer has to build up.

It helps to ask the 5 questions (not necessarily in this order)

1. What song do I bring in (this is the core of being a DeeJay. a question you have to grapple with sooner or later)

2. When do I bring it in (Where would this song fit in the current rhythm?)

3. How do I bring it in (fade in? abrupt stop? Rewind? Subtle merge? How fast should the transition be?)

4. Why am I bringing it in (does the song fit in with the overall feeling or emotion that you're trying to express?)

5. Who is my audience (empathy for your audience and how they're reacting to your music)

Try to pay more attention to the individual beats of the song. In most cases, they aren't just what the tempo and the time signature of the song say. It includes all the hidden beats that the various emotions add. For example: Try listening to a song that conveys apprehension or anxiety, and then listen to a song which is a bit more chilled out. Notice the hidden beat. The tempo itself doesn't need to change for the beat to get faster or slower.
