Title: Fractal Learning
Date: 2020-07-30
Category: learning
Tags: learning, systems
Status: draft

> The challenge we all face is how to maintain the benefits of breadth, diverse experience, interdisciplinary thinking, and delayed concentration in a world that increasingly incentivizes, even demands, hyperspecialization - Range, David Epstein

This world is a very complex, interconnected web of systems. The same goes with the various disciplines that we've invented to better understand how things fit together.

Most fields seem to exhibit a very similar fractal pattern, where the more you zoom in onto an aspect of a system, the more detail is revealed. The same is true whether you're talking about economics or physics or biology. There's a whole new world of detail at all the different layers. A microbiologist speaks a completely different language from an ecologist. One could even argue that they both view the world through a radically different set of lenses.

It's turtles all the way down, however, and even as you go deeper into a field, there's still so much complexity that you would despair at the idea of ever really understanding anything.



I'm going to talk mainly about computer science here, due to my familiarity. But I'm sure the concepts map equally well even for other domains.

You could spend years and years in deep study and you still wouldn't really actually understand how a computer worked. It's possible to choose a very specialized niche field and claim some amount of expertise in it, but for the average case, it might sometimes seem like a futile effort. There is so much underlying complexity behind even something as simple as enabling you to read these words on the screen. The whole field is in essence just a city floating in the clouds. There are towers of abstraction and abstractions built on top of those towers to make this happen:

1) Your CPU (essentially a tiny piece of silicon that can't do much but add two numbers together) executed a few million instructions during the time you were reading this sentence. Welcome to Computer Architecture!
2) These instructions are in most cases not understandable by a human. So we invented a "high-level language" and wrote another software to convert this high level language into the instructions. Welcome to Compilers!
3) There are multiple applications running on this system at the same time, somehow somebody (the Operating System) managed to abstract all this away such that the applications are able to pretend that they're the only application running on the system. Similarly, there are other resources (memory, files, I/O devices) that all need to be shared between hundreds of programs running on your system. Welcome to Operating Systems!
4) Your device doesn't exist in isolation. In fact, most of its capabilities arise in relation with other devices. Just for the purpose of loading this webpage and viewing it, it had to send multiple packets out into the internet which somehow (like a labelled envelope) found its way to the right devices and then they responded back with the data you were requesting.

In fact, all of the cases above are huge simplifications and I haven't even begun scratching the surface. [Look at how much detail](https://github.com/alex/what-happens-when) is hidden even when you do a simple task like making a Google search.

So how do you begin to make sense of all this?

One of the key concepts in computer science is Abstraction. Abstraction is when you sort of squint your eyes and treat something as a black box. I am temporarily choosing to not care about what's happening inside the black box because other details are more important. Software systems are very, very complex beasts and it's beyond the scope of any person to hold in their head all the minute details of how something is working.

For an example of abstraction think about interfaces to objects you commonly use. A car for example hides a lot of complicated circuitry and machinery, but at the end of the day, all you need to care about is the steering wheel and a bunch of pedals and buttons. That's the abstract view of a car. I don't care how that car turns these inputs into the multiple complicated outputs of force, direction etc. I completely ignore that because it's not important to me. I just need to get from point A to point B.

